---
layout: post
title: Team Lead at Ruby for Good
date: '2018-07-19 10:30'
categories: rails ruby
---

When I signed up to attend [Ruby for Good](https://rubyforgood.org/) back in February there was a spot on the form to indicate if you would be willing to be a team lead at the event. Not thinking much about it, I went ahead and checked the box and promptly forgot all about it. At the time, my thought process went something like: "Hmm, that would be good experience, but it's unlikely I'll be chosen since I'm sure they have plenty of more qualified candidates." Fast forward to early May and imagine my surprise when I get a message on slack from Chris, one of the organizers, asking if I would be willing to be a co-lead on the [Demand Progress](https://demandprogress.org/about/) project. Chris explained that I would be co-leading the team with a senior developer who had been involved with Ruby for Good in previous years. With a small degree of trepidation, I agreed to take it on and so began my team lead experience.

Before the actual event I met with the Daniel, the stakeholder at Demand Progress, and Chris. We discussed the desired outcomes for the event. Daniel was able to provide some excellent detail about three specific features that would improve the ability of the organization to conduct core activities. We agreed as a group to focus on the one that would help them the most. We would build an application that would collect schedule information for congressional committee hearings, display it in a user friendly manner, and allow users to quickly add events to their own calendar. Based on our discussions and with excellent feedback from Daniel, I prepared an initial [readme](https://github.com/rubyforgood/demand-progress/blob/master/README.md) and [user stories](https://github.com/rubyforgood/demand-progress/blob/master/USER-STORIES.md) for the project. With the scope well defined and an engaged stakeholder I was feeling good about our preparations. The only concerning detail for me was that I had been unable to connect with my co-lead during the weeks before the event.

I arrived at Georgetown University for the event kickoff Thursday afternoon to discover that my co-lead had not arrived and that I would need to pitch the project alone to the large room of developers. I did my best and a few friendly folks took pity on me and joined up to help build our project. Our 7 person team bonded over dinner in the cafeteria and I relaxed a little after the other team lead arrived after fighting bad traffic on the beltway. Unfortunately, that was the last we would see of him for the rest of the event as unanticipated circumstances pulled him away from attending.

Before our start the next morning, realizing that I would need to shoulder a larger share of the team coordination, I prepared the user stories on post-its and set up a makeshift kanban board on the wall in our workspace. Once everyone arrived it was `rails new` and we were off to the races. Or....not quite, since we had opted to use postgresql in our development environment. In hindsight, it would have been hugely beneficial to have a docker or vagrant environment pre-configured or use a database in development with a simpler install. Instead we spent valuable time struggling to get everyone set up with a working install of postgresql. Once we passed that hurdle, we divided up the team to focus on several key aspects. Amy and Amy built out a front-end using React(all the rage these days), while a Amanda and Jay started working on the backend for collecting the data from congressional websites, and Patrick focused on google calendar api integration. I ping-ponged around helping out where ever folks needed. I felt like the team quickly gelled and naturally focused on aspects of the project that played to their strengths.

By the end of the weekend we had a prototype built and I presented our results([view the slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1moq0hINDu8UuLvPLGrHGyMwJKmsI38VuoUP0ocLkD0s/edit#slide=id.g3bd5c5fa78_0_51)) at the final whole group gathering.
You can see from our group photo that we were not getting a lot of sleep but we had plenty of fun working and learning together! For me, one of the most valuable aspects of the event was connecting with so many like minded people in the industry.
